Spell Checking
==============

Introduction
------------

Everyone makes mistakes, and this is especially true of typists, who oftentimes 
transcribe text without being exact, or copy errors exactly in their haste to 
finish a task. Therefore, spell checking is an important factor of any full-text
search system if the end-user is to find information based upon any reasonable 
input. The user shouldn't be expected to account for the errors made by original
authors.

Another common source of spelling errors is introduced through automatically
transcribed documents, especially those that he been processed by OCR systems.

Techniques
----------

There are two major ways to verify spelling.[1]
1. Phonetically
1. N-Gram

_Phonetic_ spell checkers attempt to find the word that will "sound" most like 
the one that is requested, assuming it isn't already in the list of known words.
Such known words are provided in a dictionary file (on most POSIX systems, this 
is usually in /usr/share/dict/words) and will be broken in to phonemes, so words
such as "kraft" will be changed in to "craft".

_N-Gram_ spell checkers work by finding permutations of a string by swapping 
letters, trimming it to different lengths and/or replacing certain letters with 
others, then performs a search on all of those derivations, finding those that 
are closest to the original and likely to be correct using Bayesian arithmetic.
A [fantastic implementation](http://norvig.com/spell-correct.html) and 
discussion on the topic was written by Peter Norvig. This implementation is 
already in Python, so suits our little FTS engine very nicely.

More recent developments in correction technology allow contextual spelling
"correction", some of which was previewed in Google's now forsaken "Wave" (now 
[Apache Wave](http://incubator.apache.org/wave/)). These systems would allow
checking of technically correct, but grammatically improper sentences, like 
those found in the Spell Checker Poem[2]

	A Little Poem Regarding Computer Spell Checkers...
	
	Eye halve a spelling chequer
	It came with my pea sea
	It plainly marques four my revue
	Miss steaks eye kin knot sea.

	Eye strike a key and type a word
	And weight four it two say
	Weather eye am wrong oar write
	It shows me strait a weigh.

	As soon as a mist ache is maid
	It nose bee fore two long
	And eye can put the error rite
	Its rare lea ever wrong.

	Eye have run this poem threw it
	I am shore your pleased two no
	Its letter perfect awl the weigh
	My chequer tolled me sew. 


Sources
-------

[1] A Comparison of Standard Spell Checking Algorithms and a Novel Binary Neural Approach, Victoria J. Hodge and Jim Austin, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 15, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2003

[2] Jerrold H. Zar, 1992 [link](http://www.latech.edu/tech/liberal-arts/geography/courses/spellchecker.htm)


